Gh-415: In-depth aggregation guide (#420)
gchq/gaffer-doc: docs/user-guide/gaffer-basics/what-is-aggregation.md

> # What is Aggregation?

Reviewer: It might be good to explain why we do aggregation or why this is a feature and how it is useful. Potentially with a reference/link to aggregation with sketches as this is a big benefit of it but not obvious.

Author: Good point

**Aggregation** - noun

*"The formation of a number of things into a cluster"*

---

In a software context Aggregation can have a variety of interpretations, in
Gaffer this specifically refers to the aggregation function. This takes
a number of forms but the common factor between them is that they use the
underlying koryphe library to provide the

> [`ElementAggregator`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/data/element/function/ElementAggregator.html).

Reviewer: This feels very much like an implementation detail which isn't essential reading for a user. I don't think there's really another place to put it (potentially the aggregation overview page); maybe it could go in a collapsible section?

Author: Moved it over to the admin guide as probably more relevant there

state. To demonstrate what this would look like take the simple graph below
where we can apply aggregation to merge the multiple edges together.

=== "Before Aggregation"
    If we don't apply ingest aggregation all elements will be stored separately in
    graph.

    ```mermaid
    flowchart LR
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 1"
        --> B(B)
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 1"
        --> B(B)
    ```

=== "After Aggregation"
    Now if we have apply aggregation to sum the same properties on the `Edge`
    they now get stored together as one element.

    ```mermaid
    flowchart LR
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 2"
        --> B(B)
    ```

!!! tip
    For an in-depth guide into ingest aggregation please see the [administration guide](../../administration-guide/aggregation/overview.md).

The other place you can apply aggregation is at query time. As a user this is
the most common use case as it avoids the need to edit the graph schema but
enables almost all the same features.

The main difference between query-time aggregation and ingest aggregation is

> that the aggregation applied on a query will only effect the elements in that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the aggregation applied on a query will only affect the elements in that
```

# What is Aggregation?

**Aggregation** - noun

> *"The formation of a number of things into a cluster"*

Reviewer 2: "Cluster" is a bit of a loaded word in computing, especially with Accumulo. I prefer this definition: "The process of combining things or amounts into a single group or total"

---

In a software context Aggregation can have a variety of interpretations, in

> Gaffer this specifically refers to the aggregation function.

Reviewer 2: I would maybe just say it refers to ingest or query aggregation.

## Why Aggregate?

Aggregation allows us to take a set of elements and group them and their

> properties together to form a new result. These allow us to get quick insights

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
properties together to form a new result. This allows us to get quick insights
```

into our data and generate valuable outputs from our graphing queries.

There are also some key benefits when using aggregation with sketches as we
can store aggregated data in a compact format to reduce storage requirements
and improve throughput. Further reading on sketches is available in the
[reference guide](../../reference/properties-guide/advanced.md).

## How is Aggregation Applied?

The application of aggregation can be done at either data ingest time or
added to a specific query.

For ingest time the configuration is specified via the [graph schema](../schema.md)
so that as data is loaded into a graph it is aggregated and stored in that
state. To demonstrate what this would look like take the simple graph below

> where we can apply aggregation to merge the multiple edges together.

Reviewer 2: I would mention here we are aggregating by summing the properties. Other aggregation functions are possible.

=== "Before Aggregation"
    If we don't apply ingest aggregation all elements will be stored separately in
    graph.

    ```mermaid
    flowchart LR
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 1"
        --> B(B)
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 1"
        --> B(B)
    ```

=== "After Aggregation"
    Now if we have apply aggregation to sum the same properties on the `Edge`
    they now get stored together as one element.

    ```mermaid
    flowchart LR
        A(A)
        --
        "Edge
        prop: 2"
        --> B(B)
    ```

!!! tip
    For an in-depth guide into ingest aggregation please see the [administration guide](../../administration-guide/aggregation/overview.md).

The other place you can apply aggregation is at query time. As a user this is

> the most common use case as it avoids the need to edit the graph schema but

Reviewer 2: I am not sure I like the expanation that "it avoids the need to edit the graph schema...".
The admin sets up the ingest time aggregation to summarise vast amounts of input data into smaller on disk summaries (aggregates), which are useful for querying but have a much more manageable size.
End users would only really use query time aggregation to further summarise this data (for example, total sum of property X in time bracket Y).
